---
title: Why Mental Health Needs Objective Answers
slug: worst-fears
description: I had a backup plan for everything. When they all failed at once, I was left with an unexpected calm and a powerful realization':' Fear cannot be optimized. It can only be faced, understood, and dissolved.
publish_date: 2025-09-09
---

I started this year thinking it would be my best one yet. I was full of hope. For the first time, I completed a forty day period of prayer and fasting without missing a day. I put my all into my faith and my work, but by the time summer arrived, it had become the worst season of my life. The things I was most afraid of began to happen.

To understand, you have to know what I was working on. I was in a race against time. I wanted to build a successful software company before Artificial General Intelligence, or AGI, changed everything. My team and I used the latest AI tools to create products that people were impressed by. But we struggled with a problem I’ve faced for years as an entrepreneur: we could get meetings and compliments, but we couldn't get enough customers to pay and stay with us. I don’t think the issue was my skill; I can design a product and talk to customers. The real problem, I believe, was my lack of a strong network to sell to big companies, and I always waited to talk to investors, wanting a proven product first. I see now that this approach may have held me back.

When things started to go wrong, I tried every backup plan I had, but nothing worked. After the third and fourth fear happened just two days apart, I felt numb, and the foundation of the life I knew had cracked all at once. For the first time, I felt a sense of complete surrender; there was simply no immediate way out.

But a strange thing happened instead of falling apart: I became calm. My blood pressure throughout that period never went above 108/62 (the lowest blood pressure reading of my adult life), even when my entire world was crumbling. My friend J always said I never knew how to ask for help, and I saw he was right. I leaned on my therapist, and my family prayed for me. But a deep question remained in my technical mind: Why did I feel so calm when my world was collapsing?

My search for an answer led me to read everything I could about psychology and psychiatry. I realized that while therapy helps, there are serious limits to how we measure what is happening in the brain. For most human illnesses, medical diagnostics rely on measurable, objective data, such as blood tests or imaging scans. However, diagnoses for psychiatric conditions are mostly based on symptoms and subjective patient reporting. This presents a problem because overlapping symptoms and inherent problems with self-reports can delay or confound a mental health diagnosis, hindering clinicians’ efforts to provide effective treatment. Without objective measures or validated biomarkers, psychiatry is currently operating in a state comparable to the field of infectious disease before the discovery of germ theory.

This lack of objective data means diagnosis is primarily a trial and error process right now, which is difficult even with clinical expertise. The biological validity of current classification systems like the **[Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM)](https://www.psychiatry.org/psychiatrists/practice/dsm)** is poor. This is why current treatments are often far from perfect: half of adults with depression don’t improve with antidepressants or antipsychotics [1]. Progress in psychiatric pharmaceutical development has been at a near standstill for too many years. The field has not had a new effective antipsychotic medication for 50 years, not since the discovery of Clozapine in the 1980s [2]. This stagnation is partly because psychiatric drugs face far higher hurdles for regulatory approval than other medicines, such as cancer treatments. Psychiatric drug developers are required to judge the medicine against a placebo, which doubles the cost and makes success less likely. It takes about 13 years and costs $1 billion to bring a new brain drug to market, compared with around five years and $300 million for a cancer drug [3].

My desire to solve this diagnostic problem led me to a field called computational psychiatry, which involve the application, analysis, and invention of computational and statistical approaches to mental function and dysfunction. This felt like the perfect bridge between my current technical life and this new curiosity. This vision is what experts call Precision Psychiatry, which aims to [improve diagnosis and therapeutics](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41380-025-03070-5) through the use of genetic or molecular testing. Experts believe now is the time that we can do better because technology is rising, we have better access to the brain, and we are using better imaging approaches. The objective is to work toward integrating symptomatic, behavioral, and biological information into the definition of mental disorders. This could lead to a placeholder for biology in the DSM.

However, my research also showed the profound complexity and pitfalls of applying technology here. Applying AI to drug discovery is a tricky challenge because it operates where "bits meet atoms," matching complex data systems with biological reality. A generation of AI start-ups that promised to transform drug discovery has failed to live up to the hype. Some start-ups struggled financially, with shares falling drastically. The problem has proved beyond early algorithms because "we know surprisingly little about our own biology," and challenges in measuring crucial body processes "starve models of the data they need". Under pressure, some AI companies chose easy, well-known targets, resulting in "me too" or "me better" drugs [4] that were not much better than those already on the market. This high-risk environment validates the cautious approach of my ambition.

To ensure my technical solutions are grounded in clinical reality, I am still in tech, but I have started working in the mental health field as a mental health worker on a part-time basis. This is how I gain the first-hand experience I need to achieve my vision of creating AI tools tailored toward psychiatric applications. I aim to develop computational methods to better understand the brain’s overall dynamical organization.

My clinical work is necessary because the global mental health crisis is taking a massive toll on workplaces. About 12 billion working days are lost every year globally to depression and anxiety, costing the global economy $1 trillion annually [5]. This crisis, exacerbated by the pandemic, has led to depression cases increasing 25 per cent globally in 2020–2021, and the trend has not yet receded to pre-pandemic levels. My dream is to one day open a practice that helps people in high-stress jobs, like tech, finance, aviation, and medicine, and also helps immigrants like myself.

In high-stress corporate environments, research suggests that talk can be cheap. Companies trumpet their commitment to mental health, but one-third of surveyed workers said they would not tell their boss they needed time off for mental health reasons [5], and half who did disclose problems said they had been discriminated against. If companies encourage staff to speak out but do not make actual changes, such as reducing workloads or managing unmanageable hours, staff can feel they are being gaslit. Interventions like external employee assistance programmes don't work well because most people do not use them anyway. Real improvements come from managers learning practical skills, like listening to difficult conversations, rather than just acquiring general knowledge.

The problem is particularly acute in medicine, one of my target sectors. Physicians face high burnout rates, with [45.2% reporting symptoms of burnout in 2023](https://www.ama-assn.org/practice-management/physician-health/fighting-physicians-right-access-mental-health-care). Many physicians are deterred from seeking care because of intrusive and irrelevant credentialing application questions about past mental health treatment. This fear discourages them from seeking support, which can greatly heighten the risk of untreated illness. The AMA supports language that focuses only on whether a current impairment exists, asking: "Are you currently suffering from any condition that impairs your judgment or that would otherwise adversely affect your ability to practice medicine...?". Though progress has been made to remove this stigmatizing language, the fear of professional repercussions still prevents many physicians from seeking needed care.

Aviation, another high-stress field, faces similar barriers. Commercial airline pilots face more rigorous mental health checks and disclosure requirements than doctors. Pilots who reveal conditions like depression are subject to prolonged suspensions and monitoring, leading to a widespread culture of silence. One pilot (https://on.ft.com/42zK11H) who stabilized with antidepressants found that when the FAA accessed his therapy notes, his comments were interpreted as red flags, making the "safe space of therapy... feel like a trap". Another pilot stated that the "idea that I had to be perfect on paper influenced my desire to not interact with healthcare providers and get proper treatment" [6]. Experts warn that if challenges are not [addressed at an earlier stage](https://casten.house.gov/media/press-releases/castens-bipartisan-pilot-mental-health-bill-passes-house), it can lead to diminished focus and attention and compromise safety.

My clinical work helps me understand that the solutions must also be deeply humanistic, especially for communities facing disparity. Globally, there is a stark mismatch between resources and demand, with low-income countries having fewer than two mental health workers per 100,000 people. This validates the use of task-shifting or task-sharing, which uses non-specialists to deliver interventions. Studies show that community-based approaches are highly effective: one randomized control trial found that patients were two and a half times more likely to recover when receiving care from lay champions than from a psychiatrist [7]. This success is attributed to the greater likelihood of patients completing treatment when it is offered by someone from their own community who comes to their doorstep.

The Trieste model in Italy, where funding from closing large asylums went into strengthening community services, demonstrates the power of a human-centered approach. The guiding principle is to respect people with mental health problems as citizens with rights. Franco Basaglia, who pioneered the model, spoke of "putting the illness in parentheses" [8] to look at the person in the context of their whole life. This system, which has no waiting lists, offers a low barrier to treatment because anyone can seek help from a community center without a doctor’s referral. The success of Trieste lies in its emphasis on teamwork and avoiding the isolation caused by "silos" where different services (like the mental health department, the jail, and housing) do not talk to each other.

My journey from personal collapse to scientific curiosity has led me to choices I never would have considered before, including medical school, a PhD in clinical psychology, or nursing school. These paths are long and difficult, but they offer the clinical knowledge that I need. The experts agree that we cannot have an either/or approach in mental health; we must rigorously examine both pharmacological and social solutions. Precision medicine should be complementary to the attributes psychiatrists already bring to patient care and will "enrich psychiatry and not detract from the humanistic element that is such a core attribute" [9].

This summer, my worst fears happened. But in the middle of it all, I found a new direction. I am still an ambitious person, but now my ambition is not just about what I can build with technology, but also about what I can heal in people, bringing together both rigorous science and essential human connection.

[1]: https://www.fau.edu/newsdesk/articles/Depression%20Study-The%20Lancet.php
[2]: https://on.ft.com/4gxZmWu
[3]: https://on.ft.com/3VWoFI3
[4]: https://on.ft.com/42uX9Fm
[5]: https://www.ft.com/mentalhealthcrisis
[6]: https://on.ft.com/42zK11H
[7]: https://on.ft.com/47M2Ty1
[8]: https://www.psychiatrymargins.com/p/an-introduction-to-the-trieste-model
[9]: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41380-025-03070-5
